Now let's bring translation into the picture.
Coordinate frame A, Coordinate frame B which
is translated and rotated with respect to
coordinate frame A and a point P. We can represent
the point P by a vector with respect to frame
B and that vector can be described in terms
of its components along the XB and YB axis.
Now we can rotate that vector into a new frame,
coordinate frame V, and coordinate frame V
has axes which are parallel to coordinate
frame A. We've already talked about how to
rotate a vector from one coordinate frame
to another using a rotation matrix. And as
a sanity check that we've written this expression
correctly, we noticed that these two Bs are
next to each other. That's a good thing.
Now let's describe the origin of coordinate
frame V with respect to coordinate frame A
and we do that with a vector. That's a vector
from A to V. Now we're allowed to add vectors
so we can add this vector ATV to the vector
VP to obtain the vector that describes the
point P with respect to coordinate frame A.
We can do that because these two vectors are
described with respect to coordinate frames
whose axes are parallel to one another. I
can substitute one equation into the other
and write this. And again because these two
coordinate frames are parallel I can write
this.
Let's expand the vectors and matrix in this
expression and write them in terms of their
elements. Now I can pull a little bit of a
trick and now write it like this. If you're
unsure about this step, expand out the matrix
and convince yourself that they are exactly the same.
Now this expression has got a two-element
vector and a three-element vector over here.
Let's make things a little bit more symmetric
and write it like this. What we've done now
is added some zeros and some ones to the bottom
row of the matrix. Previously we had a 2x2
rotation matrix. Now we see that that's embedded
into the top left corner of a 3x3 matrix.
And our vectors which used to have 2 elements
now have three elements. We can write this
even more succinctly in this form. The notation,
the tilde, above the little p indicates that
it is a homogeneous vector. It has got three
elements not two, and we'll talk about that
in just a moment. The point is described with
respect to coordinate frame A by a homogeneous
vector which we can obtain from the homogeneous
vector of the point with respect to coordinate
frame B multiplied by this matrix.
The elements of the matrix include the rotation
matrix, which is the function of the orientation;
Theta, and the translation between the origin
of coordinate frame A and coordinate frame
B. We have the familiar representation of
a vector in a 2-dimensional plane, two numbers
A and B. The homogeneous vector has got three
elements in it. It's got A and B and an additional
element which is set to 1. This we refer to
as a homogeneous transformation. It is a 3x3
matrix. The homogeneous transformation matrix
T comprises a rotation matrix which is 2x2
and a translation vector which is a 2x1 matrix
padded out with a couple of zeros and a one.
This matrix describes a relative pose. It
describes the pose B with respect to the pose
of A. All of that is encoded in this single
3x3 matrix. A mathematician would say that
homogeneous transformation belongs to the
special Euclidian group of dimension 2. Symbolically
we would say matrix T belongs to the set SE(2).
Finally it's time to start making these abstract
concepts real. Pose is just a matrix. Where
we had the symbol ksi before we can substitute
this 3x3 homogeneous transformation matrix.
When we talk about compounding or joining
two poses together using the O+ operator,
that is exactly the same as multiplying these
two homogeneous transformations. We use the
O- operator to indicate the negation of a
relative pose, and that is simply the inverse
of a homogeneous transformation matrix. I
mentioned earlier that the inverse of a rotation
matrix is equal to its transpose. That is
not the case for a homogeneous transformation
matrix. You need to perform a proper matrix
inverse: invert a 3x3 matrix.
We introduced a dot operator which transforms
a vector from one coordinate frame to another.
And that is simply the product of the homogeneous
transformation matrix and the vector represented
in homogeneous form. Remember that the homogeneous
vector is obtained from the original vector
P, the two vector and we augment or append
a one element to that to form a three element
vector.
Here we are in MATLAB and we're going to experiment
with these 2-dimensional homogeneous transformation
matrices. So what I’m going to do is introduce
a function called transl2 which creates a
homogeneous transformation representing a
pure translation, that is a translation of
1 in the x direction and 2 in the y direction.
Previously we saw how to create a 2-dimensional
rotation matrix, for instance a rotation of
30 degrees is created like this. We see that
this rotation matrix is only 2x2 compared
to the 3x3 homogeneous transformation matrix.
So I can create a homogeneous transformation
matrix equivalent of this rotation by prefixing
with the letter T. This function returns a
3x3 homogeneous transformation matrix. We
can see the rotation matrix part up in the
top left corner. We can see that the translation
part of this matrix is equal to zero. This
homogeneous transformation matrix represents
a pure rotation.
Now we can multiply these two together. transl2, Multiply it by the rotation part - 30 degrees.
And now what I have is a homogeneous transformation which represents a pose.
It's got a rotational component and it's got a translational component.
Now the toolbox has got a shorthand function to achieve this.
I pass in the x and y translational
parts; the rotational part and the option
to say that that angle is specified in units
of degrees. We have exactly the same matrix here.
Now let's plot this particular pose and see
what it looks like. And to do that I'm going
to create an axis in which to plot, and x
is going to vary from 0-5 and y is going to
vary from 0-5. I need to set the aspect ratio
so that everything looks reasonable, so I'm
going to set the axis so that the aspect ratio
is square. I'm going to put a hold on because
I'm going to plot a few poses. The first pose
I'm going to plot I'm going to put into workspace
variable T1 and it is the pose that I looked
at just a moment ago: 1 in the x direction,
2 in the y direction and the rotation of 30
degrees. There is a homogeneous transformation
matrix. Now I'm going to plot that.
To plot that I use the function trplot2. The
2 suffix means that it's for 2-dimensional
poses. Pass in the pose represented by the
homogeneous transformation. I'm going to plot
it as a frame named 1, and I'm going to plot
it in the color blue. There are quite a few
options there. And there we see the pose plotted.
We can see that it does indeed have a translational
component; 1 in the x direction, 2 in the
y direction. And it is rotated with respect
to the world coordinate frame.
I can create another pose quite easily. I
can create a pose that has got an offset of
2 in the x direction. 1 in the y direction
and no rotation. That's what the homogeneous
transformation looks like. Now I'm going to
plot that. I'm going to use the function trplot2
again, pass in the homogeneous transformation
matrix, and I’m going to plot it as a frame
labeled 2. To be different I'm going to plot
it as a red colored frame, and here we see
the second pose. It's got no rotation. It
has got a translational component.
Now I can compose 2 of these poses. I’m
going to say pose 3 is equal to pose 1 compounded
with pose 2. That's what the transformation
matrix looks like. I can plot that. I'm going
to plot that one, trplot2, pass in the matrix,
there's going to be a frame, called 3 and
I'm going to color that one green. So if
I compound those 2 poses I end up with the
pose shown here as 3. The way we can think
about this is we moved from the world frame
2 from frame 1 which is rotated, and then
in frame 1 we then moved 2 in the x direction
and 1 in the y direction. But X and Y direction
are frame 1, not on the world frame, and that
gets us to the frame labeled as frame 3.
I could compound the poses in the opposite
order. I'm going to create a new pose T4 and
it's going to be pose 2 compounded with pose
1. We can see that's what the homogeneous
transformation matrix looks like and it's
different to T3. I can plot this. I can pass
in T4. I can plot it as a frame labeled 4
and I'm going to plot it in the color cyan.
Here we can see the frame 4 which has resulted
from compounding pose 2 with post 1. Now I'm
going to introduce a point into the plot.
I'm going to introduce a point at a coordinate
3, 2. I need to transpose that so that it
becomes a column vector. There it is. I can
plot that. Plot point P, and I'm going to
plot it as an asterisk. There we see it in
our figure. If I want to determine the coordinate
of the point with respect to frame 1 then
what I need to do is to use the inverse of
the relative pose 1, which is that, and multiply
it by the points coordinate in homogeneous
form. I'll take point P and I'm going to append
a 1 to it. What I have now is the homogeneous
coordinate of the asterisk with respect to
the coordinate frame 1.